tonight's program is cancer still
Emperor how innovative research and
treatments offer hope for cure this
gives us a very particular and
interesting look at the 2009 Pulitzer
prize-winning book the Emperor of all
maladies a biography of cancer
it also looks at the groundbreaking
advances in cancer research treatment in
prevention that have emerged during the
past decade since its publication before
our friend and partner Margaret Ann ball
Meyer who is president of MCD foundation
introduces our distinguished panel this
evening we're going to launch tonight's
program with a short video featuring
Ross McKenzie he's no stranger to most
of you in this room and Ross as the
retired syndicated columnist and editor
of the editorial pages of the Richmond
news leader in Richmond times-dispatch
and he'll join us immediately after the
film but thank you to everyone who
supports the MCV foundation or hopefully
both the MCB foundation and the Virginia
Historical Society we couldn't do this
work that we do without you so we
appreciate you being here enjoy your
evening
[Applause]
[Music]
thirty years ago I put the afternoon
news we are editorial pages to bed first
edition deadline 10:20 a.m. and went to
play noontime handball at 2:00 p.m. I
had a routine physical at McGuire clinic
on palm road with my internist MCV
trained Hilton almond toward the end of
that physical as dr. almond pressed
around my upper abdomen he said you're
not pregnant or not at last check I said
and he said I think you know need to go
downstairs for a cat-scan he was
suspicious of something he was feeling
near my spleen he was thinking possible
lymphoma the scan and a subsequent
biopsy confirmed that was 1989 I was 48
my journey began with MCV refined
instinct of Fulton almond and flowed
through whitey Robertson and Walter
Lawrence to the informed and scrupulous
monitoring of Harold Chung along the way
there were countless other MCV
physicians clinicians and steadfast
healing nurses such as nurses Brenda and
Lynn during cancer number one and
Patricia and Angela during cancer number
two without that full cavalry writing to
the rescue and without let's see North
Hospital
Dalton Clinic radiation oncology the
bone marrow transplant unit Massey and
the Stoney Point clinic no further
dreams in this script would have come
true I wouldn't have known the past
trifecta of decades nor the joys those
thirty years have contained none of our
sons college years and careers none of
their marriages and children none of the
life my wife and I have lived holding
hands none of her Windrush beneath my
wings no Sun sets or moon rises no
crashing surf no rippling creaks no
breezes soething and the birches and
pines no getting lost in books at night
no waking in the morning and refusing to
let the old man in no learning from our
Labrador how to roll on one's back in
life like a happy dog 30 or indeed 20
years ago what remained would have been
buried or sprinkled and that would have
been that
so
Thank You American medicine thank you
especially MCB medicine doctors and
nurses and clinicians off you gave me
you wife saviours made possible my past
30 years
god bless you mere appreciation doesn't
cut it nor gratitude
this this is love
Ross Mackenzie
[Music]
talking about the not admitting
impediments to the marriage of true
minds it's not really a Robert Herrick
either talking about the liquefaction of
the fair Julia's clothes or its and it's
not Ali MacGraw and Ryan O'Neal in love
story but it is it does it does express
some small measure of the feelings I
have for this institution that has
allowed me 30 more years on this cosmic
orb
just unbelievable the turn of events
that let us say MCV and this event
occurred as the video noted and the
longer piece stipulates with Hilton
Allman who discovered this during this
routine physical this lymphoma and asked
me if I was pregnant and turned out we
had something else going on and I called
up my friend whitey Robertson neighbor
across the way and Goochland County and
I said what do we do here what's this
all about what's a little you know
here's the editor who doesn't even know
what lymphoma is he said you need to see
Walter Lawrence I said I'll work it out
for you so he called Walter and Walter
came in and pronounced me a lucky guy
because I was having one fun I had
lymphoma when we were beginning to treat
lymphomas with chemotherapy and not with
surgery he assured Ginny and me when we
were meeting with him in my hospital
room out at McGuire clinic that that he
had operated on about 500 of lymphoma
patients and the surgery had failed
all cases and we didn't see how that was
very good fortune but he said you're
gonna do fine we've now got a we now got
a different method to treat we treat you
guys and we're gonna be just fine so
it's become almost a cliche personal
cliche for me to say that both verbally
and in print that I've done so well on
my checkered medical journey because of
three things a benevolent Lord an
angelic wife and and outstanding
medicine as practice at MTV I cannot
introduce you to God though he's
everywhere but my Angela and my angelic
wife is right down here and and in an MC
V foundation assisted version of this is
your life I can introduce you to a
number of the MCV trained or MCV
practicing doctors and nurses who helped
me along the way
Hilton almond who as we said discovered
this cancer that my first cancer the
initially whitey Robertson longtime
friend is here pulmonary thoracic wizard
stewardess - Walter Laurence Walter
himself is here I'm gonna see more of
him on the panel I told us I was the
lucky guy as I said because I was having
this episode when I did Lynn Fisher and
Brenda Bremner are both here who treated
me infused me during cancer number one
and saw Yaniv itch who treated me during
cancer number two saul has come down
from from Bethesda to be here this
evening they are all here and I would
ask them to please stand for a round of
recognition but for them
[Applause]
but for them we wouldn't be having this
conversation we lack only Craig how and
we treated me for cancer number one and
the nurses who treated me for cancer
number two and John McCartney's
colleague Harold Chung who has followed
me like a hawk for 17 years so thank you
all
abiding love to you for the life you and
your caring and your genius and have
allowed me to live now I'm an artifact
of an earlier cancer therapy hour in
lymphoma I just missed the era of
Surgery surgical ineffectiveness and was
treated by radiation and chemo oncology
then transitioned to targeted drug
therapies and now to immunotherapy
consisting of gene alteration and cell
transfer Buck Rogers stuff or yes
Rochard rocket science I think we're
teed up to hear about some exciting
things about the latest magic in cancer
therapy being performed right here in
River City at MCV so to begin that phase
of the program it's my pleasure to
introduce Margaret Ann ball Myer
president of the MCB foundation
[Applause]
well Ross you've made my job pretty
difficult because such an eloquent and
heartfelt a meaningful story and so much
about what we're going to talk about
tonight thank you for sharing that with
us thank you for bringing people
together and we'll go we'll move on with
the evening so thank you Ross
very much and all of the people who
supported him over time I also want to
thank Jamie basket for his kind words
and for partnership with the MCV
foundation and for hosting this evening
tonight and this lovely auditorium that
is just a wonderful place to gather I
also want to recognize as Jamie did
Austin Bracken bro
so Austin is a lifetime trustee of the
MCV foundation so he he remains on both
boards both of our organizations and I
also want to say that he did bring us
together to create this partnership but
I also want to be sure that you know he
really had the idea for this and he had
the idea that if we came together that
there would be a lot of people
interested in the intersection of health
and history and I think he was inspired
by the book that we're going to talk
about tonight that improve all maladies
so Thank You Austin thank you for that
and being gathered here tonight I also
need to recognize another member of the
MCB Foundation board who's been quite
critical to this organization charlie
Brian who's here tonight charlie
thank you so much former president and
CEO of the Virginia Historical Society
and a member of the MCB foundation Thank
You charlie for being here
and I do want to acknowledge that we
would not be gathered here tonight
without the Virginia sergeant Reynolds
foundation support and underwriting for
this event so again Austin and for all
of the members of the board thank you so
much for the support that we have to do
this event now many of you are very well
familiar with MCB foundation but for the
few of you who may not be MC V stands
for Medical College of Virginia the
Medical College of Virginia foundation
was founded in 1949 so we are
celebrating we're at the end of
celebrating our 70th year our mission is
to inspire and steward philanthropic
resources for the MCB campus at VCU we
currently manage our have assets under
management of over 600 million dollars
representing over 1,700 funds that
support all of the five health science
schools the hospital and the Massey
Cancer Center at VCU we are just so
pleased to be here on our third program
in this health and in history
partnership so to get us started I will
not be introducing the full panel I'm
gonna leave that to our moderator but
I'm going to introduce him and that is
the Dean of our School of Medicine Peter
Buckley Peter became Dean just about
three years ago in January of 2017 he
came to us from the Medical College of
Georgia and he is a psychiatrist with a
specialty in schizophrenia and in
January he will become the interim CEO
of VCU health and vice president of
Health Sciences on the MCB campus at VCU
Peter
good evening everybody
and you can hear me okay yes fantastic
it's a real privilege to be here as I
look out at this room I see nothing but
young people so I'm so glad to be your
laughs I didn't laugh Ross your remarks
and the video were really spectacular
thank you and you bring home to us which
we all know that there's not a family in
America that's not been affected by
cancer at some stage and so this for all
of us is personal and I was yesterday in
Philadelphia and there's a remarkable
painting in Philadelphia that's of
relevant to this evenings discussion and
it you'll know what a course Walter it's
the Agnew clinic and it's a painting of
somebody having breast surgery and dr.
Agnew is in his clinic with the latest
treatment and it's called a Halsted
mastectomy and it was a pretty blunt
instrument for a condition that was
poorly understood but it did save lives
in its day but not enough and with a
significant amount of disability mm-hmm
so that was yesterday and this morning I
got up and I was watching TV I was kinda
towards dissipate land thing happening
and I listened to a very interesting
advertisement as for a new drug for
cancer which was interesting in itself
but they talked all about whether you
were hormone positive hormone negative
what the particular genetic profile was
and they talked about p.o personalized
oncology
I thought amazing from yesterday's
Halsted surgery to now something that's
tailored to each individual
so that's what we're going to be talking
about this evening and we have a
staggeringly esteemed panel I'm going to
introduce these person the first person
is it has been mentioned that our care
is good at MCD the first first person is
an iconic figure at our institution dr.
Walter Lawrence please come up Walter
Walter is professor emeritus in the
department of surgery and he's also
director of emeritus of the Massey
Cancer Center having been the founding
director of the Cancer Center between
starting the cancer center between 1975
and 77 and he's a former past president
of the American Cancer Society we can
scour America to have somebody more
dignified than Walter and we wouldn't
find them so thank you the next person
on the panel is a remarkable scientist
and that Steve Brant come on up Steve
and Steve is associate director for
translational research at the Massey
Cancer Center he got his training he's a
physician by training he got his
training at Mount Sinai and he's been
here all his career he's been a
scientific beacon for the Massey Cancer
Center and for our faculty and his work
as you'll hear later focuses on novel
treatments for malignancies particularly
cancers like non-hodgkins lymphoma
the final speaker and then the panel is
dr. John McCarty come up John and John
is another remarkable colleague you want
to believe a story that he followed
Steve because he got his training also
at Mount Sinai for not mistaken and John
is the holder of a very distinguished
chair to G Watson James chair and we
have these chairs who honor previous
colleagues and they're very important
because they enable us to bring the kind
of talent built in in John as dig'
Watson James
chair and Steve as the Olson chair and
that helps us bring this kind of
extraordinary talent to our to our city
to the Commonwealth John's focuses on
immunotherapy and he'll tell you a
little shortly about some of the
exciting work and so what we're hoping
to do today is give you a sense of how
far we've traveled in the time period
that represents what Ross well
illustrated in his video to what's
happening today so we're gonna I'm going
to sit down and then I'm gonna ask some
really nasty questions and I think well
and I'm gonna steal your water like so
so nobody has a better perspective on
how the journey cancer has traveled here
at and Walter who's been at the for
field of our our cancer arena for
decades so Walter I'm interested in in
asking you your thoughts on on the book
what did you think about you're an avid
reader and so tell us what you think
well thank you Peter before I comment on
though I'd like to thank you and the MCV
foundation for carrying on with this
wonderful chance to talk to these people
about advances in cancer and especially
when I thank Ross where is he
there's over the rice area that grasper
is that's the most wonderful endorsement
this Massey Cancer Center and MCB has
ever had so it's very excited about that
and then and then I also have to dispel
one little thing you said I was you
acted like I was important and I wasn't
actually I came here from New York from
a Cancer Center but the person who
really got cancer going here is somebody
that some of the people in the audience
may
it's the late Susan left and she was
sellable one-person Cancer Center here
and it should get a lot of credit the
other thing that I'd like to comment on
before I say anything about the book is
how proud I am of the Massey Cancer
Center as I told Gordon ginder on more
than one occasion
a gang of guys here and girls got
together and form a little Cancer Center
and then he came along and really build
it up into something really important
and exciting and I was just so proud of
what he's done but I don't think he
would have done it without Becky Massey
yeah and we gotta give her a lot of
Christ dude
now how many of you I'd like you to
raise your head how many of you have
really read this book I hope it's a
homework for the book well I think this
is a fabulous book for a whole bunch of
reason well first of all since I came
from a Cancer Center in New York before
we're here I had my first career there I
I think it said it's amazing how he
covered so many things has talked about
so many of my friends and classmates
even and I told about things that I
never even knew like Janet Rowley who
did Fonda who discovered the first
oncogene Philadelphia chromosome
Ernie winter was my roommate when I was
a fellow over there and he's the guy
that wrote the original paper or at
least letter I guess it was a paper now
on on how lung cancer which was once
very rare here but then was our number
one killer he wrote the letter that drew
attention to the fact surprised that it
was due to tobacco so there are a lot of
little things in this book if you those
of you who read it and I hope you will
because I've read it twice I thought it
was terrific
and it it it just it doesn't cover
institutions it doesn't mention the
Massie Cancer Center but then it doesn't
brag about other institutions either it
talks about people and laypeople as well
as scientists and it's a it's just an
exciting read it reads like an exciting
novel and I can't urge you enough to
read it well I read it when it first
came out which was about seven or eight
years ago and then when I got a chance
to be on this neat panel I thought I've
gotta read it again
and I got so much out of it the really
good second time so I would say it's a
it's a it's a wonderful book and and
what I'm hoping that you will all get a
chance to read now I wanted the book I
might point out one thing about it
though it came out in 2011 and of course
there's a book that came out last year
that very tall himer kindly gave me when
he found out I hadn't read it but mr.
Graber called breakthrough and it's one
of the things we're gonna hear a lot
from our two basic scientists here
tonight about the breakthrough of
immunotherapy and and I think in his
prologue of it up his second book he
sort of gives a little dig to this book
about we're talking about tonight but I
can tell you this is so complete a book
and such a wonderful story that I just
hope you all hurry home and get one
really great will you try paper I lose
when - oh yeah it's not a paperback now
let me turn to John John as experts
specifically in transplantation and that
was something that was pretty risky and
was confined to people with really
severe right illness so how's that
changed over time
well I actually participated in my first
transplant during my internship
back in 1986 not long before Craig how
and Saul Jana vich set it up set up the
transplant program here at MCD in 1988
and at that point it truly was I'll use
a football medal metaphor the Hail Mary
pass of Medicine when patients really
had failed to respond to many other
therapies they were giving given
essentially what would be lethal doses
of chemotherapy to their bone marrow and
hopefully to the cancer we would give
them back someone else's bone marrow and
immune system and then basically support
the patient to get them back together
it was tough it was difficult many
patients did not survive the process but
many people did and from that start the
company used the concept of you know we
didn't create all of these things
ourselves I didn't my team didn't but we
stand on the giants of people who came
before us and so when I came to you know
by the time I came to work under Saul
you know we the oldest we would consider
a transplant for a fan with a family
member
transplant was 55 the oldest we might
consider for an unrelated because of
national donor pool was perhaps about 50
and that held true until about 2005
that's not all that long ago and finally
we're seeing that these new innovations
about how to find better matches how to
better find that best match between a
recipient and a donor how to do better
supportive care how to try to hone in
that that response we want transplant is
all about trying to teach the immune
system to love the patient and hate the
cancer right it's almost like if you had
a family member moving to your house you
know that they would probably make it
their own to a certain extent and we
want that to happen we want that donor
to move into the patient's house and say
I love this place but I don't like that
lymphoma I don't like that and if I'm
gonna make it get out of here we got to
keep that focused on that purpose and
we've gotten better at that
so now believe it or not the the group
of patients that are the fastest-growing
patients receiving transplant in the
United States and internationally are
people aged 60 to 80 okay we're now
using it not for people who have no more
options we're now using it because we
want the standard of care to be better
we're used so for example people with
multiple myeloma one of the most common
blood cancers in older patients it's now
part of standard of care to receive
a bone-marrow transplant as a way of
extending their time of remission and to
do better so I think this has been a
real a real change to be able to take
this very powerful tool and really
change it from what really kind of felt
like a club to turning it into a very
very much more fine scalpel to be able
to find a better balance between that
risk and the benefit well that's a huge
change absolutely let's move over to
Steve so Steve obviously Nixon declared
the war on cancer and that followed with
with massive federal funding including
the formation of the National Cancer
Institute so how is all that come to
today we can get up in the morning and
hear about a drug that's have got a
molecular fingerprint to it take us
through that yeah well there have been
enormous changes and developments since
the announcement of the war on cancer
many but not all of them have been
directed at deciphering the molecular
signature of cancer and in the 70s that
area that field was in its infancy now
we can it's almost routine we're able to
dissect and characterize the molecular
genetic operations in individual
patients tumor it's literally at this
point in time and that provides enormous
potential benefits but it's also
associated with very significant
challenges clearly if we know a
particular uncle gene or tumor
suppressor gene has undergone a mutation
and
that that is responsible at least in
part for the development of the tumor it
gives us an enormous weapon or an array
of weapons to use to specifically design
therapeutic regimens which target the
particular pathway that has been
disrupted by the by the mutation and
there's some there been some spectacular
successes Walter mentioned Janet Rowley
and the identification of the of the
oncogene responsible for chronic
myelogenous leukemia the BCR Abel
Augustine and that led to the
exceptional success of a targeted
approach to a defined tumor and we now
have drugs we should specifically attack
the kinase that is responsible for
chronic myelogenous leukemia and in the
ensuing decades other tumor types have
been discovered which also respond to
the targeted approach for example lung
cancer with EGFR mutations are out
mutations we know with a high degree of
certainty whether those patients will
respond to a particular drug but the
challenge is the the ultimate success of
this approach is yet to be fully
realized and the our ability to
replicate the situation with CML has
been a very difficult very difficult
process tumor cells have a way of
finding mechanisms of escape from that
targeted therapy in addition even more
threatening is the possibility of the
tumor cell developing alternative
pathways tumor cells morphing in a way
right morphing they are prone to genetic
instability which leads to additional
mutations which confirm resistance the
initial therapy so in some we we're in a
position of
normos promise being able to dissect out
the molecular genetic landscape of
individual tumors allowing us to
individualize therapy but we still have
a long way to go in achieving the
outcomes that were ultimately looking
for which amount to cures and I'm sure
we'll discuss some of the options for
that great minutes you know I was struck
years ago with I don't know what he
remembered a story of Angela Jolie who
had a mastectomy although she didn't
apparently have cancer but she had the
hereditary and molecular signature that
she would develop cancer and so that was
an example putting to practice what she
described about the kind of molecular
signature and how that guides treatment
in her case preventative but we know
it's not just drugs as not right at
surgeries had a role as well tell us
about how surgery is actually as
everybody here in the audience knows
that the main three treatments for
cancer either radiation drugs it's so
far anyway and in the third is surgery
but for what we call and for some of
these things like leukemia and multiple
myeloma lymphoma surgery is not even
feasible because of the diffuse nature
is a problem but most of these things we
call solid tumors like the lung the
stomach the breast are things that have
for many years been treated only by
surgery when you stop to think about it
they didn't even discover radium and
roentgen rays until around the turn of
the century and it wasn't until after
World War two that we had any
of knowledge of any anti-tumor drugs so
surgery's been around a long time and so
when they asked me to be on this panel I
thought by golly I'm I'm sold they ought
to get hairy bear he's took my job I
just started talk about surgery now but
anyhow I then I realized that that I'm
the only guy that's been lived long
enough to been around long enough to see
the whole history yeah so you're gonna
get it yeah actually
back in the time of Hippocrates we have
a didn't even think you could treat
cancer in fact they mentioned it but I
think the first person that ever took a
scientific approach and not one like we
do now with randomized trials and all
sorts of things like that it was this
person that he referred to Peter
referred to earlier William Stewart
Halsted and of course he was our patron
saint in surgery especially since he was
the first chairman at Johns Hopkins
where I was an intern where we had to
worship him and his logic he was a good
scientist and his logic was that let's
take one cancer let's take breast cancer
it's easy one to talk about in this
regard he noticed clinically that the
breast cancer would sometimes spread to
the lymph glands of the arm and he came
to the conclusion without any real
studies that the way to solve that
problem was to take out not only the
whole breast but this the lymph nodes
under the arm and all the tissues in
between and as Peter mentioned earlier
that's pretty deforming and can lead to
things like
our arms and everything but the
practical fact was he was the first
person who ever had any real cures of
breast cancer and he he overwhelmed
everybody by having half the women he
operated on very carefully and with
tedious technique and about half of them
were cured so it it became our our
catechism from then on that the larger
the operation the larger the cure and
that was and we all believed that I got
it when I think no I don't know how we
did that but even when I moved here from
New York in 1966
I remember giving one of those main
surgical conferences on not only do it
like dr. Halstead but to make it a
little bigger even so and this whole
idea of the bigger the operation the
bigger the care became an international
thought and it and then along came a a
friend of mine from Pittsburgh who just
died the other day a hundred and one
Bernie Fisher and we had just started a
surgical service here and he said here
were friends he said I want to start
some trials and I you guys have a lot of
cases so why don't you get involved well
I better get involved with oh I think
this dr. Halstead was was the guy and I
think Bernie Fisher's thought was in god
we trust' but if other other people have
to have data
what's this data big so we had about
that time we really as a nation began to
use randomized trials and the first
trial really was it was a big jump to us
but when retrospective he wasn't he just
showed that maybe you don't need to take
out quite as much maybe just the whole
breast and we found out that if they
hadn't already spread somewhere the
results were just as good oh my god
the surgeons and people were a little
skeptical but we went ahead with another
trial which really led to today's
treatment which is just very limited non
deforming surgery of the breast to just
remove the tumor
what has changed we went from more is
better to the less is better and it was
and how did we do that well we did that
because we had these other edge events I
mentioned we had do drugs that we could
give in addition so the alamode to the
surgery but and we could prove that a
small surgery with some x-ray therapy
afterwards
now that x-ray therapy had been born or
fine I think just as good results as
this horrible surgery before and and
that whole idea of less is better was
really occurred in other sites as well
at the same time we were doing these
deforming breast operations
I gotta admit we were doing very
deforming head neck operations as well
but by this time his time went on with
the refinement of other modalities like
radiation and chemotherapy we were able
to really end up with quality of life
much improved so I think we've we've
come a long way in this whole business
and it's it's been striking now have we
improved the results well we'll talk
about that later I'm not sure but we
sure have improved that the treatment
and the acceptance of treatment by
combination with other modalities to
make our surgery so much more acceptable
and nowadays it's a lot of these things
are almost outpatient procedures whereas
before we were we were doing what
we're almost awful things and what
amazes me is that we all believed it was
the right thing which shows how it takes
somebody like Bernie Fisher who is the
well the surgeons in the country thought
he was evil yes yeah but but now William
Stewart hosta is evil and Bernie
Fisher's terrific thank you for that
that does extraordinary tour of a large
body of knowledge Thank You Walter now
Walter mentioned the book Break truth
which is about immunotherapy which is
arguably the hottest area right he took
us true thirty years huge hundreds
thousands of papers you're gonna do the
same thing and tell us about to be
another sure for it
so I guess sort of an extension I
mentioned how essentially a what we
would consider are consider a
traditional bone marrow or stem cell
transplant is essentially giving someone
a new immune system that is not going to
tolerate having that cancer hang around
we've actually be able to refine it to
the point where we're even using
transplant to treat certain kinds of
autoimmune diseases in fact in January
we're starting our first planning visit
to start a trial using transplant to
treat multiple sclerosis Wow and so
that's just a it's a small step but
there are bigger steps you know let me
step back I'm gonna pull down the the
the slide set and give you a PowerPoint
poisoning but let me talk a little bit
about why does cancer happen not from
the standpoint of genetic defects and
molecular changes and so on but there's
another partner here and that's the
immune system how can we bring the
immune system to be a better partner
in all of these other innovations that
we're bringing up bringing to bear on
the cancer problem and treatment of
disease well a couple things for example
we partner with a member of one of dr.
Lawrence's colleagues to actually have
them remove melanoma tumors that are
metastatic and we extract the lymphocyte
that have already said you know I'm not
sure you're supposed to be here take
them out they're expanded they're
energized and they're rien
some very very amazing responses for
people with metastatic melanoma that's
an example of essentially this is not
all about being an oncologist it's not
all about being a a non surgical person
that this is essentially a
cross-disciplinary kind of way and we
can get at these problems much better
when we start expanding our horizons so
how does cancer have help happen well
there are many ways but the three way is
either the immune system does not
recognize the cancer as being there
second is there might be cells there
that recognize that something is there
that shouldn't be there but they're not
enough numbers of them so they're
overwhelmed and then the third is I use
a lot of analogies is that much like
Dorothy and and crew going through the
poppy fields going to sleep but the
tumor is very often have certain
capabilities of being able to put the
immune system to sleep so it can't work
effectively so we can counter that with
a couple of things there are some great
agents called checkpoint inhibitors that
essentially is like giving the immune
system a red bowl but it's it's
essentially nonspecific and so just as
you get responses to the cancer you also
get other potentials autoimmune side
effects I mentioned with our allogeneic
transplant sometimes that immune
response is off target and sometimes
that new immune system tries to reject
part of the patient they have nothing to
do with the cancer and that can lead to
long term in short term side effects so
what if we were able to take the benefit
of cells that would recognize their own
how can we create this well we can take
your own lymphocytes and maybe their day
job today is remember that last flu shot
you had and you all had your flu shots
right okay all right they remember that
last pneumonia you had they remember you
had that little nascent colon cancer but
it took care of it and that's their day
job there look
around for that to occur again well we
take those out and now we have a problem
we have a lymphoma
okay so Ross if you had come to us now
listen up because this is what you would
have would have experienced this would
have been your next next therapy
essentially we just as now we all have
smartphones that we have to upgrade the
app to make it do what we want to do
when say we're traveling in a new city
or a new country we want to download the
map we upgrade the app well we upgrade
the app the immune system by literally
genetically reprogrammed in these T
cells these cells of your own immune
system to now not like a particular
protein that is prevalent on lymphomas
just as yours c19 unfortunately we've
never named these has no poetry in their
souls what that's what it's called so
these cells are then expanded they're
excited we give the patient a very
low-level chemotherapy that essentially
makes room in the immune system and then
we replace those cells in there and they
start to go to town and an example young
children with acute lymphoblastic
leukemia who had basically a life
expectancy of five years of of two years
of less than 5% were treated with this
therapy 90% of them went into remission
and 80% of those were long-term cures
okay with lymphoma in patients who may
have had anywhere from four to seven
different therapies including transplant
were given this therapy 60% of them had
an overall response rate and even if
their response rate was partial or they
relapsed shortly if they relapse within
the next six months they were now
eligible for transplant that they
weren't eligible for before so now we
got a therapy in patients we were
normally sending to hospice care that
we're now giving what could effectively
be curative therapy that's the power of
immunotherapy how did that happen it's
because people invested in basic science
people invested in the ability to
understand the biology of the cancer
from the surgeon that removed it that
didn't just necessarily send it off for
this is what it is but also participated
in that trial and was sent off so that
we can better understand the biology
driving this or the characterization of
this so we could put out like in those
cop shows a bolo for the cancer
a definition of what it looks like so
that we can identify that unique target
and capitalize on that and use our own
immune systems and augment it and teach
it to be even more effective that is
what we're looking at now we're using it
now for lymphoma out of a ll we're using
it for chronic lymphocytic leukemia we
are starting a trial in solid tumor with
sarcomas we are going to be doing
several trials in multiple myeloma and
we look to essentially I'll talk about
more about the future with where we go
from here because this is really the
first coconut on the reef of really
truly building what we hope for an
immunotherapy so many years ago in cell
um you know therapy to really be a true
partner with many of the other promising
modalities to make everything much more
effective that's just awesome we're so
excited we love it forward and we love
it now Steve not everybody is as
fortunate and some people respond and
some people don't respond tell us what
we understand about treatment resistance
and the molecular signature of that you
know well resistance patients with
cancer
and those attempting to treat them
cancer cells are in a sense highly
Darwinian era survivors and can combine
that with their genomic instability
cancer cells find a way to develop and
find escape routes from even the most
potent and effective targeted therapies
there are many ways of Ishould tumour
cells can become resistant they can
develop metabolic abnormalities that
that render the target and agent
ineffective they can develop additional
mutations which prevent the targeted
agent from attacking and disabling its
receptor or its kinase activity in
addition cells can develop alternative
pathways they activate alternative
pathways that substitute for the pathway
that has been disabled by the targeted
agent actually the most challenging
problem in drug resistance is cells are
initially addicted to a particular
pathway and if we disable that pathway
they are sent on a pathway of
self-destruction apoptosis programmed
cell death but tumor cells find a way to
lose their addiction to that pathway and
you have to think of entirely new ways
to induce them to die there are so many
ways that tumor cells can become
resistant I
it's naive and unrealistic to think that
we can overcome this problem with a
simple single approach and this may mean
bringing in alternative approaches
actually multiple alternative approaches
and in that way immunotherapy can
represent an alternative approach to
circumvent the problem of tumor cells
that are become resistant to an initial
targeted agent so this is arguably the
major challenge in oncology today and I
think the future in the future we will
develop new paradigms of treatment in
which we treat tumor cells early on with
multiple agents including some that
reduce the likelihood of development of
resistance and multiple modalities and I
think that may take a while but I think
ultimately if we want to deal with the
problem of resistance we're gonna have
to think of entirely new strategies so I
guess that's partly why the federal
government promoted focused research
true cancer designated cancer centers
and and you were there at the beginning
of that you launched our Cancer Center
so take us through that and kind of what
does that meant what does NCI
designation mean and how did that come
about Walter
then there were a couple other
categorical cancer centers but most
universities weren't really worrying
about it too much
and so the but there was a lot of
scientific ability in our medical
schools and universities so it that's
when the idea of having the expertise of
the clinicians and the scientists that
at universities to get more involved in
cancer so that's when the whole idea of
getting NCI cancer centers going and
then so that's our own Dean here Kendall
Nelson whose name's on that building
downtown was he was bugging me every as
soon as I got here we got every cancer
said he'd been hearing about it so and
this is also what led to President
Nixon's war on cancer now I think we
were thinking more simple-minded then we
were thinking oh my god you is find a
better drug or a combination and that'll
fix it and of course it's taken a lot
more understanding of the process of
cancer and these mechanisms are John and
Steve have been talking about for how
the cancer center is up my cancer cell
is outsmarting us but we so we started
they had several kinds of cancers I had
a few just basic science that were only
working on the mechanisms the others
they called clinical cancer centers and
that was most of them and that's what we
became they they had to have both
science basic science and clinical
activity in cancer to be a center and
then they had this wonderful thing
called a comprehensive cancer center
which included prevention and things of
that sort which is really what the
American Cancer Society was selling you
know when you get down to it yeah and so
when we put in our core grant
with the way they they said well you
need extra money but you have to prove
that you have a lot of good scientific
grants yes so when we put in for our
grant we put in a lot of stuff about
prevention and all that stuff but we
didn't we'd become a comprehensive
center because we didn't have any funded
research in prevention or things of that
sort which I always argued incorrectly
it doesn't make any difference
comprehensive is just different well as
it turns out I think we were focusing a
little too much on just finding a
treatment mm-hmm and we really must have
a progress though
dijanna Steve been talking about is
based on a lot of basic science that may
not even have been heading for cancer
research
and and the basic side is at the time
that President Nixon started this thing
we're arguing oh no we have to invest
more in science in general and of course
that those of us who were clinicians and
we're started um I think oh no we gotta
get tart more targeted research and as
it turned out most of the things that
wonderful things that John and Steve
been talking about have really been more
towards what's going on here what's the
mechanism and some some of the big
advances have come from unexpected
sources of good basic science research
so I'm sort of a convert now I thought
it I believe it's important to be
comprehensive but the nomenclature was
really more based on where you had
scientific research grants that were
already peer reviewed by scientists at
the National Cancer Institute and and so
on and I'm sure with what you're hearing
now I'm sure we're going to be a
comprehensive cancer center which I must
admit I poo pooed in for many years
because I figured it was we were really
I wasn't really thinking and I'm gonna
play so so before I am public so you're
not girls up I'm not go there let me ask
Steve from your perspective as a
scientist well what's the benefit and
the significance of an nci-designated
Cancer Center well Peter it's enormous
ly valuable from a number of stand
points by virtue of being an
nci-designated Cancer Center we have an
established linker nexus with not only
the NIH and NCI but multiple other
cancer centers throughout the country
designated cancer centers 64 so at last
count and that allows us there are many
ways in which being designated allows us
interact with and then take advantage of
developments emanating from other cancer
centers but it also gives us an
opportunity to disseminate our work and
our discoveries to the US scientific
community at large in this country and
internationally it gives us access to
multiple mechanisms of funding for
exciting new discoveries we also gain
access to certain unique laboratories at
the NCI which are available really
primarily to designated centers in
addition that allows us from a clinical
standpoint to team up with many other
institutions to allow clinical trial
laboratory based clinical trials
involving novel agents of cutting-edge
modalities and ages and for example as a
concrete example there's a mechanism
that moves a um one making
somewhere in a limited number of
consortium and we're part of one of the
consortium this mechanism to carry out
trials of all the NCI sponsored agents
yet often cutting-edge highly novel
agents and trials can be conducted
through a large network known as ATC TN
the experimental therapeutics clinical
trials Network it's open only to
nci-designated cancer centers so we are
able to conduct trials emanating from
this mechanism but conversely several of
our trials that develop here at the
massive cancer center the last couple of
years have gone on to become ET cen
trials that are open to all the other 60
plus designated cancer centers and
finally being a designated cancer center
is it's really an essential aspect of
being able to recruit clinical and basic
scientists from other cancer centers as
we attempt to strengthen and build upon
our capabilities here many of these
individuals only consider going to
another so they go down the street they
bypass if we did not have NCI desert you
know when they first started anybody his
brother could call his little office of
cancer center and so in a way by saying
NCI it meant we had legitimate yes
peer-reviewed research going on that
made us different than the guy who just
said well I got a Cancer Center now yes
and just by way to bring you up to now
we've just hired a new Cancer Center
director after two decades and more of
Gordon Kinder's great service we've just
hired a doctor Rob wind and if you think
what our colleagues have said is not
true
I was at a meeting last week and I
stared at another Dean who was
desperately trying to recruit Rob when
he and I was able to go no human hair
because of everything that Steve said
the designation is very significant
we're gonna I think I'm gonna ask Walter
just to kind of give us you promised
this that you'd give us kind of the
landscape of how we've done you'll give
us kind of a forecast of how we've done
in terms of truly making inroads and
cancer and then we're going to go to
some questions from you as audience what
well actually we've talked about
wonderful things but I think if I were
in the audience I want to know are you
getting anywhere yeah and I and I didn't
know what the answer the question was
but fortunately my old buddies at the
American Cancer Society have some data
people for 1990 and 2017 that's a sort
of recent yeah and I wrote him down
because I thought they were sort of
interesting and then I want to interpret
on if I can one is lung cancer has gone
down 31% in terms of the percentage of
deaths per 100,000 people with this
awful our number one killer which
incidentally was way down the list when
I was a medical student she always it's
been coming up a lot another one breast
has gone down in terms of mortality rate
is going down 39% prostate 50% and and
you say well do you how about stomach
well actually stomach seem to disappear
a while back what's happening to all
these cancers was it the new treatment
no those are exciting new things for the
future they're talking about you know I
think it's that old American Cancer
Society thing if you know what some
what the cause of something has go up
you could prevent it or you could
identify early that's why they always
said and in screening and when you stop
to think about it in lung cancer I think
it's mainly been the decreasing in
tobacco use it's gone along now there
are some new possibilities from a
treatment like this very focused
radiotherapy for very early lesions that
are picked up at high risk people and
breast cancer obviously there's there's
improvements but most of them although
some of them is due to treatment most of
them are really diagnosis because of our
interest nationwide and screening
asymptomatic people the preventative
task force always pooh-poohed our
prostate business but when I looked over
the data at the VA hospital over a
period of time since PSA was started
being used we changed our stage from
advanced stage prostate cancer being the
overwhelming majority to finding we had
a lot more terrible one so I don't know
that treaters may decide they did a good
job but we made it available by early
diagnosis so that's why I think the
Comprehensive Cancer Center approach of
trying to get things either find out
what what made things happen so that we
can get rid of that cause or correct it
or at least early diagnosis really the
answer it's not as exciting sometimes
but as the treatment but it's probably
very important so that's why I'm very
excited about the fact that we're
expanding our preventive activities at
the Cancer Center and and we have a
program going
now and I think we're getting somewhere
thank you imagine to be at the top of
your game for decades
we're going to take some questions from
the audience we have some roving mics
and Peter will answer them now my name
is bill bug and gosh it's amazing some
things you guys are doing it's just
really amazing and of course up the
effectiveness of some of these new
things wonderful here but I was
wondering what's it doing to the cost of
the treatment oh that's it that's a
great as an outstanding question a
question this cost job do you want to
take yeah like that so being the one who
spends the most healthcare dollars
around here on the stage yeah transplant
just to give you an idea the average
cost of a transplant a bone marrow
transplant from someone else is about
500 to a million dollars the costs are
just the drug for the Carty at this time
is approaching $400,000 and the
supportive care and monitoring after
runs anywhere from a million to a
million five I recognize there are a lot
of there's a lot of pre-emptive prenatal
care that we could deliver for those
dollars the idea though is to not just
cure the cancer and leave a patient uh
non-functional okay the idea is to give
someone back the years that they have
lost and not to sound like an accountant
if I only in giving someone a year or so
that's that's a pretty expensive
treatment but if I can give that person
five 10 or even 15 years then it doesn't
become that much per year that that
person has actually then it has cost the
healthcare system now I think the idea
is this is the beginning first high-tech
technologies are always very expensive
there isn't a lot of competition just
yet but there will be third as we learn
better how to do this an example of one
of the things we're going to be
exploring here is that we may make our
own
car t-cells at VCU at Massey and there
instead of paying a company half a
million dollars for the drug we may
invest for the cost of the drug we may
actually buy two machines that will
actually help us make them at probably a
cost of around a hundred thousand
dollars which is still not small but
it's certainly a lot less so I think
that as we get smarter as we get better
as we as as Steven saying not just rely
on this brute power of this particular
cancer not every cancer therapy that is
new gets positioned for the people who
have no other options okay so right now
you're seeing the cost and the and the
delivery of care to people who've been
through multiple therapies and therefore
may be more fit less fit and more frail
I bet the cost will go down as we're
learning how to better partner with
other agents and when to position these
treatments at the right time earlier in
therapy where we won't have that drastic
cost no question I don't want to see you
up here okay thank you let's take
another question
Walter Hutton Boyer maybe you all would
repeat the story which i think is
fascinating the treatment of
choriocarcinoma in women and how that
happened and it's been a long time ago
is interesting what and I I might refer
the group here to what is said about
this in the book because this this is
one of those cancers it arises in the
placenta and it's sort of a rare cancer
but it was one of the very first ones
that was totally cured by drugs you know
most of the time the drugs helpless but
haven't
in the past these nonspecific drugs have
but in this case it was a cure and
actually of interest to many of you is
there one of the wife of one of our
faculty members was one of the first
people cured at the NCI
by dr. Lee and Hertz with it yeah and
and and he was smart too we did another
thing he kept measuring something in the
blood to make sure that the patient
continued to get treatment even though
there was no more recency test good
detective yeah yeah and because they
thought he was now practicing they fired
him story you can read about it in the
book we're gonna take one more question
and then we're gonna have the
opportunity dr. Horace you're the true
legend in the room I see you out at the
VA hospital fairly frequently could you
tell us the significance of the
partnership between the VA and MCB how
both benefits from it oh yes yeah
actually every time I bug every Dean
that comes here because every Medical
School always looks down their nose a
little bit at the VA and in the VA when
we get down to it is over a third of our
education opportunities here at the
Medical College and there's a bunch of
wonderful people out there and the
patients are super we veterans
and and I'll tell you this is one
beenzino's that because since he's been
here he's really gone to bed for a lot
of things at the VA and we're proud of
you well I have to tell you this morning
you may you may not know this but this
morning we had the first ever cancer
center director at our VA presented our
leadership needed talking about this
partnership dr. Ron garden house and who
just joined us from Maryland so we're
gonna make that partnership that you
have overseen we're gonna make that
stronger and stronger into the future
you're doing well that partnership was
part of what got me here yeah he was
part of our team at the VA I went out
there when I retired because I came with
a I couldn't get funding because I my
mentor was still at the institution in
Seattle where I was training and the
same grant I was writing Seattle time
after time enough time I couldn't get I
came here I wrote for a merit review and
for an ro1 and I got it the moment I was
here my laboratory was at the VA I was
given essentially a funded salary
unheard of anywhere else I was looking
at it gave me the time and the space and
the freedom to do basic science research
become better funded to publish and to
start working on transplant and and move
from there so that actually that
partnership was very unique of all the
places around the country that I looked
that is part of what brought me here for
whatever that's worth fantastic we're
glad you came my mule had lined up you
had a final question would you like to
ask
so the question was what are the
criteria that determined how long a
transplant patient should might live
John so I guess it's really the the
response to the treatment at this point
so to give you an example dependent
really varies on the disease that varies
on the stage of the disease how
resistant what is the reason we're doing
it and that so it's a very across the
map thing for a very high risk so we
never we never do transplants for
someone where the risk of the treatment
is higher than the risk of the disease
okay and so we try to anticipate that as
much as possible
there still is just because the nature
of the diseases we tend to treat with
transplant there still is a mortality
rate of about in many cases of national
numbers are about 25 to 30 percent in
some programs like ours it's more like
15 to 18 percent that isn't always true
and some years there are uncertainties
such as what strain of the flu virus
comes along what other exposures might
come along is norovirus prevalent in the
community that can actually alter things
that we can't predict and may alter the
survival from year to year by the most
part we're doing we're doing this as a
curative therapy the exception is
multiply Loma where we cannot cure it
but what we can do is put it into
remission for a much longer time to
allow these innovations to come along so
we have a better tool by the time
someone needs our treatment again I'll
give you an example we just recently had
our one of our first patients
transplanted in 1988 come by to come in
business or 1989 on business and that's
not an exception we're seeing more and
more patients in fact my largest growing
clinic is our long-term thriver Ship
clinic that we have so I'm not sure if
it fully answer your question precisely
but we are seeing more and more and more
so traivor ship is a great point for us
to stop this evening this phase and
we'll have the opportunity for
discussion outside but now's a good time
I think to ask why it'd be easy to come
up and say some words why it is the
chairman of our MCV foundation and he's
a partner at Williams Mullen he is more
than that he is a dedicated colleague
that has really given a tremendous
amount to this community and he's going
to say some very good remarks because
his dad is sitting right in front of
right over here and he's watching him
and his dad is on the on the board also
and the Beasley's are have a tremendous
legacy of medicine in this city and so
thank you Wyatt
senior Thank You Wyatt not so junior and
close the south sir thank you so Peter
thank you I'd like to thank everybody
for coming tonight on behalf of the MCV
foundation I know it's a early cold
night and it takes a lot to get out to
this but I think I hope all of you
enjoyed this as much as I did learning
about the progress we've made in the
treatment of cancer and the future we
have going forward it's just been highly
interesting to me and frankly it also
underscores the great resource we have
here in our city that is our health
system our med school that are really
helping making great strides both with
research and treatment of cancer so
thank you all for coming
I'd also like to thank Dean Buckley dr.
Lawrence dr. grant and dr. McCarthy for
their just fantastic discussion I
learned a lot and I hope you did too we
are going to ask our panel to go back
upstairs so that everybody can have a
chance to meet with them after we leave
here and Dean if you want to go ahead
and take everybody now so that we can
get ahead of the crowd
one second we'll finish up I'd also like
to thank Ross McKenzie he did frankly
just a fantastic job of putting a human
face on this as we talk about treatment
and where things are going we can't
forget that cancer the ultimate story of
a cancer story is the patient story and
the story of the the treatment that our
patients get from their providers the
doctors nurses and everybody else it's
very important Ross thank you for doing
such a great job
lastly I'd like to thank the museum
staff Jamie Graham and everyone else for
helping us put this together it's been a
great night and thank you all for coming
and now I ask everybody to come back
upstairs and have a drink and some food
and a chance to talk to our panelists
thank you
[Applause]